[Blog post] Introduce new OTel features in Envoy and Istio (#4553)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2024/new-otel-features-envoy-istio/index.md

---
title: 'Observability on the Edge: Enhancing OTel support in Envoy and Istio'
linkTitle: New OTel features in Envoy and Istio
date: 2024-05-28
author: '[Joao Grassi](https://github.com/joaopgrassi) (Dynatrace)'
issue: 4534
sig: OpenTelemetry Specification
---

In the dynamic world of cloud-native and distributed applications, managing

> microservices effectively is critical. Kubernetes has become the de facto

Reviewer: ```suggestion
microservices effectively is critical. [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) has become the de facto
```

standard for container orchestration, enabling seamless deployment, scaling, and
management of containerized applications.

The distributed nature of such systems, however, adds a layer of complexity in
the form of networking for in-cluster communication. Two well-known projects,

> Envoy and Istio, have emerged as the foundation for the smooth management and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/) and [Istio](https://istio.io/), have emerged as the foundation for the smooth management and
```

operation of such complex environments.

Together, these technologies empower organizations to build scalable, resilient,
and secure distributed systems.

[Istio](https://istio.io/) is a service mesh, that orchestrates communication
between microservices, providing features such as traffic management, security
and, of course observability. Istio uses the Envoy proxy as its data plane.

> [Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/) is a high-performance proxy, designed for

Reviewer: I prefer introducing the links to projects when they are mentioned for the first time (see my suggestion above), but this is also OK, since you also provide some details on what those projects are. Choose what you prefer.

Author: Yeah I was also in between the two options, but I prefer to link later together with the bit of explanation of what those are.

single applications/services as well as a communication bus and "universal data
plane" for service meshes.

[Envoy](https://www.cncf.io/projects/envoy/) and
[Istio](https://www.cncf.io/projects/istio/) projects are open source and part

> of the Cloud Native Computing Foundation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/).
```

## Observability in Envoy and Istio

The Envoy proxy deployed by the Istio service mesh is the perfect candidate to
ensure incoming and outgoing requests are properly traced. This approach
provides distributed traces of the entire service mesh, giving an overview on
the communication between services — even when the applications themselves are
not instrumented.

Envoy offers several

> [tracers](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/config/trace/trace)

Reviewer: is there a reason why this is pinned to version 1.29.4?

Author: I thought about pinning to 1.29 as that is when the new features became available. I guess we could also link to `latest` but that can be misleading if somehow the link changes or whatever else. Not sure what is better 🤔

Reviewer: That makes sense, let's keep it pinned then.

> that do the job of tracing the requests, including the OpenTelemetry tracer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that do the job of tracing the requests, including the [OpenTelemetry tracer](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer).
```

The [resource detector feature](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/pull/29547)
not only added the environment detector, but also made it possible for any other
resource detector to be easily added with Envoy's built-in extensions feature.

### Custom samplers

Another exciting feature added to Envoy is the possibility of implementing and
configuring custom samplers. Envoy follows the
[OTel Sampler interface](/docs/specs/otel/trace/sdk/#sampler), which makes it
easy for anyone to contribute their own samplers.

Envoy ships with the
[Always On Sampler](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/extensions/tracers/opentelemetry/samplers/v3/always_on_sampler.proto)
which simply forwards all spans. This base implementation can be used as a
reference implementation for smarter samplers.

## Demo

It's time to see the new features in action! For this, we will use the
[Istio Bookinfo application](https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/bookinfo/).
We will deploy it in Kubernetes and use Istio as our service mesh. Traces will
be exported to [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) using HTTP.

### Install Jaeger

> First, start by installing the Jaeger operator:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, start by installing the [Jaeger operator](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.57/operator/):
```

    enableTracing: true
    extensionProviders:
    - name: otel-tracing
      opentelemetry:
        port: 4318
        service: simplest-collector.default.svc.cluster.local
        http:
          path: "/v1/traces"
          timeout: 5s
        resource_detectors:
          environment: {}
EOF
```

This installs Istio and configures the OpenTelemetry tracing provider. We are
using the `http` exporter, and sending to the OTLP/HTTP endpoint in the Jaeger
collector. We are also enabling the environment resource detector in
`resource_detectors`.

Next, we need to enable the tracer using Istio's
[Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/):

```shell
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: otel-demo
spec:
  tracing:
  - providers:
    - name: otel-tracing
    randomSamplingPercentage: 100
EOF
```

And finally, we configure the `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable
for the Envoy proxies:

```shell
cat <<EOF | k apply -f -
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: ProxyConfig
metadata:
  name: my-proxyconfig
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  concurrency: 0
  environmentVariables:

>     OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES: "host-name=abc-123"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES: "host-name=abc-123"
```

`host-name` is not covered by the semantic conventions, it should be `host.name`, I guess?

Author: Good catch, I wanted to add an arbitrary attribute but somehow picked host :D. Yes, `host.name` is the semconv correct key. Fixed!

EOF
```

### Deploy the application

The final step is to deploy the bookinfo application
([bookinfo.yaml](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.22/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml)):

```shell
kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
kubectl apply -f bookinfo.yaml
```

### Test it out

Let's make some requests to one of the services:

```shell

> k exec "$(k get pod -l app=ratings -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -c ratings -- curl -sS productpage:9080/productpage | grep -o "<title>.*</title>"

Reviewer: This assums that people have `k` as an alias for `kubectl`

---
title: 'Observability on the Edge: Enhancing OTel support in Envoy and Istio'
linkTitle: New OTel features in Envoy and Istio
date: 2024-05-28

> author: '[Joao Grassi](https://github.com/joaopgrassi) (Dynatrace)'

Author: Nice, thanks!

---
title: 'Observability on the Edge: Enhancing OTel support in Envoy and Istio'

> linkTitle: New OTel features in Envoy and Istio

Reviewer 2: I like both the long and short titles, but they aren't mutually consistent and I think they should be. I'm not sure how to fix this though.

Author: Yeah looking now I agree with you. I will try to come up with something better.

Author: @chalin I tried a small change. Let me know what you think.

Reviewer 2: Yes, better. I've suggested tweaks via https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/4553/files#r1627377010.

single applications/services as well as a communication bus and "universal data
plane" for service meshes.

[Envoy](https://www.cncf.io/projects/envoy/) and
[Istio](https://www.cncf.io/projects/istio/) projects are open source and part
of the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/).

## Observability in Envoy and Istio

The Envoy proxy deployed by the Istio service mesh is the perfect candidate to
ensure incoming and outgoing requests are properly traced. This approach
provides distributed traces of the entire service mesh, giving an overview on
the communication between services — even when the applications themselves are
not instrumented.

Envoy offers several
[tracers](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/config/trace/trace)
that do the job of tracing the requests, including the
[OpenTelemetry tracer](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer). Tracers can be
configured either directly within Envoy (when using it as a standalone
component) or for all Envoy instances by using Istio.

Here is an example of how Istio and Envoy work together to trace requests:

![Distributed trace with Istio and Envoy](envoy-tracing.png)

> ## Introducing new OpenTelemetry tracing features in Envoy and Istio

Reviewer 2: Given the context of this post, could we shorten the heading here? E.g.,

```suggestion
## New OTel tracing features in Envoy and Istio
```

Although Envoy already had support for exporting OpenTelemetry traces using
gRPC, it lacked support for exporting using HTTP. OpenTelemetry specifies both
transports as first-class citizens. In addition, other areas such as providing
resource attributes and configurable sampling decisions were lagging behind the
stable portions of the OpenTelemetry specification.

> Starting from Envoy 1.29+ and Istio 1.21+, users now have access to the
> following new features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Starting from Envoy 1.29+ and Istio 1.21+, users have access to the new features described below.
```

easy for anyone to contribute their own samplers.

Envoy ships with the
[Always On Sampler](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/extensions/tracers/opentelemetry/samplers/v3/always_on_sampler.proto)
which simply forwards all spans. This base implementation can be used as a
reference implementation for smarter samplers.

## Demo

It's time to see the new features in action! For this, we will use the
[Istio Bookinfo application](https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/bookinfo/).
We will deploy it in Kubernetes and use Istio as our service mesh. Traces will
be exported to [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) using HTTP.

### Install Jaeger

First, start by installing the
[Jaeger operator](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.57/operator/):

```shell
kubectl create namespace observability
kubectl create -f https://github.com/jaegertracing/jaeger-operator/releases/download/v1.57.0/jaeger-operator.yaml -n observability
```

Then deploy Jaeger `all-in-one`:

```shell
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: jaegertracing.io/v1
kind: Jaeger
metadata:
  name: simplest
EOF
```

### Install and configure Istio

> Now, let's install Istio using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, install Istio using
```

> [`istioctl`](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/istioctl/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`istioctl`](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/istioctl/):
```

using the `http` exporter, and sending to the OTLP/HTTP endpoint in the Jaeger
collector. We are also enabling the environment resource detector in
`resource_detectors`.

Next, we need to enable the tracer using Istio's
[Telemetry API](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/observability/telemetry/):

```shell
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: telemetry.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: Telemetry
metadata:
  name: otel-demo
spec:
  tracing:
  - providers:
    - name: otel-tracing
    randomSamplingPercentage: 100
EOF
```

And finally, we configure the `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable
for the Envoy proxies:

```shell
cat <<EOF | k apply -f -
apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1beta1
kind: ProxyConfig
metadata:
  name: my-proxyconfig
  namespace: istio-system
spec:
  concurrency: 0
  environmentVariables:
    OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES: "host.name=abc-123"
EOF
```

### Deploy the application

The final step is to deploy the bookinfo application
([bookinfo.yaml](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/istio/istio/release-1.22/samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml)):

```shell
kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
kubectl apply -f bookinfo.yaml
```

### Test it out

> Let's make some requests to one of the services:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test your setup, make some requests to one of the services, for example:
```

```shell
kubectl exec "$(k get pod -l app=ratings -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -c ratings -- curl -sS productpage:9080/productpage | grep -o "<title>.*</title>"
```

> Then we can check it out on the Jaeger UI. There, we should see some traces!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then you can check it out on the Jaeger UI -- you should see some traces!
```

![Distributed trace viewing in Jaeger](jaeger.png)

> Let's analyze the spans produced by Envoy:
> 
> 1. First, we see the outgoing (egress) call from the `ratings` service to the
>    `productpage` service.
> 2. Then we see the incoming (ingress) call in the `productpage` service.
> 3. We also see the `host-name` resource attribute we applied using the
>    `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`. That attribute was picked up by the environment
>    resource detector and added to all spans Envoy created.
> 
> Apart from this, we can see all the other downstream calls made, as all services
> have the Envoy sidecar injected by Istio. We have full observability of the
> calls between services, just by enabling the OTel tracer in Envoy!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

From the spans produced by Envoy you can see (in order):

1. Outgoing (egress) call from the `ratings` service to the
   `productpage` service.
2. Incoming (ingress) call in the `productpage` service.
3. `host-name` resource attribute we applied using the
   `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`. This attribute was picked up by the environment
   resource detector and added to all spans Envoy created.

You can also see all the other downstream calls made, as all services
have the Envoy sidecar injected by Istio. You have full observability of the
calls between services, just by enabling the OTel tracer in Envoy!
```

---

> title: 'Observability on the Edge: New OTel features for Envoy and Istio'
> linkTitle: New OTel features for Envoy and Istio

Reviewer 2: How about:

```suggestion
title: 'Observability at the Edge: New OTel features in Envoy and Istio'
linkTitle: New OTel features in Envoy and Istio
```

> date: 2024-05-28

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2024-06-06
```

Together, these technologies empower organizations to build scalable, resilient,
and secure distributed systems.

[Istio](https://istio.io/) is a service mesh, that orchestrates communication
between microservices, providing features such as traffic management, security
and, of course observability. Istio uses the Envoy proxy as its data plane.
[Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/) is a high-performance proxy, designed for
single applications/services as well as a communication bus and "universal data
plane" for service meshes.

[Envoy](https://www.cncf.io/projects/envoy/) and
[Istio](https://www.cncf.io/projects/istio/) projects are open source and part
of the [Cloud Native Computing Foundation](https://www.cncf.io/).

## Observability in Envoy and Istio

The Envoy proxy deployed by the Istio service mesh is the perfect candidate to
ensure incoming and outgoing requests are properly traced. This approach
provides distributed traces of the entire service mesh, giving an overview on
the communication between services — even when the applications themselves are
not instrumented.

> Note: At minimum, applications must be configured to propagate the
> `traceparent` header.

> Envoy offers several
> [tracers](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/config/trace/trace)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Envoy offers several
[HTTP tracers](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/config/trace/trace)
```

> that do the job of tracing the requests, including the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for tracing requests, including the
```

> [OpenTelemetry tracer](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer). Tracers can be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[OpenTelemetry tracer](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/config/trace/v3/opentelemetry.proto). [Tracers](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer) can be
```

configured either directly within Envoy (when using it as a standalone
component) or for all Envoy instances by using Istio.

Here is an example of how Istio and Envoy work together to trace requests:

![Distributed trace with Istio and Envoy](envoy-tracing.png)

## New OTel tracing features in Envoy and Istio

Although Envoy already had support for exporting OpenTelemetry traces using

> gRPC, it lacked support for exporting using HTTP. OpenTelemetry specifies both
> transports as first-class citizens. In addition, other areas such as providing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gRPC, it lacked support for exporting using HTTP. OpenTelemetry supports both
protocols as first-class citizens. In addition, other areas such as providing
```

resource attributes and configurable sampling decisions were lagging behind the
stable portions of the OpenTelemetry specification.

> Starting from Envoy 1.29+ and Istio 1.21+, users have access to the new features
> described below.

Reviewer 2: Because the sentence starts with "Starting" we don't need the "+" signs IMHO.

```suggestion
Starting from Envoy 1.29 and Istio 1.21, users have access to the new features
described below.
```

Reviewer 2: Also, for interested readers who want to find out what is new in those releases, could you provide links to "Envoy 1.29" and "Istio 1.21"?

Author: Good idea! I added links to the changelog/release notes for each. Also spotted the wrong Istio version, it should be `1.22`. All fixed!

### OTLP HTTP exporter

The
[OpenTelemetry tracer](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/config/trace/v3/opentelemetry.proto)
in Envoy can now be configured to export OTLP traces using HTTP. This allows

> sending telemetry to observability sinks using OTLP/HTTP, directly from Envoy
> proxies.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, maybe:

```suggestion
it to send telemetry to observability sinks using OTLP/HTTP, directly from Envoy
proxies.
```

This resource detector follows the
[OTel specification](/docs/specs/otel/resource/sdk/#specifying-resource-information-via-an-environment-variable)
and allows users to further enrich the spans produced by Envoy proxies.

The [resource detector feature](https://github.com/envoyproxy/envoy/pull/29547)
not only added the environment detector, but also made it possible for any other
resource detector to be easily added with Envoy's built-in extensions feature.

### Custom samplers

Another exciting feature added to Envoy is the possibility of implementing and
configuring custom samplers. Envoy follows the
[OTel Sampler interface](/docs/specs/otel/trace/sdk/#sampler), which makes it
easy for anyone to contribute their own samplers.

Envoy ships with the
[Always On Sampler](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/v1.29.4/api-v3/extensions/tracers/opentelemetry/samplers/v3/always_on_sampler.proto)
which simply forwards all spans. This base implementation can be used as a
reference implementation for smarter samplers.

## Demo

> It's time to see the new features in action! For this, we will use the
> [Istio Bookinfo application](https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/bookinfo/).
> We will deploy it in Kubernetes and use Istio as our service mesh. Traces will
> be exported to [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) using HTTP.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's time to see the new features in action! For this, we use the
[Istio Bookinfo application](https://istio.io/latest/docs/examples/bookinfo/),
and illustrate how to:

- Deploy in Kubernetes, with Istio as service mesh
- Export traces to [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) using HTTP
```

### Install Jaeger

First, start by installing the
[Jaeger operator](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/1.57/operator/):

```shell
kubectl create namespace observability
kubectl create -f https://github.com/jaegertracing/jaeger-operator/releases/download/v1.57.0/jaeger-operator.yaml -n observability
```

Then deploy Jaeger `all-in-one`:

```shell
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: jaegertracing.io/v1
kind: Jaeger
metadata:
  name: simplest
EOF
```

### Install and configure Istio

Next, install Istio using
[`istioctl`](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/install/istioctl/):

```shell
cat <<EOF | istioctl install -y -f -
apiVersion: install.istio.io/v1alpha1
kind: IstioOperator
spec:
  meshConfig:
    enableTracing: true
    extensionProviders:
    - name: otel-tracing
      opentelemetry:
        port: 4318
        service: simplest-collector.default.svc.cluster.local
        http:
          path: "/v1/traces"
          timeout: 5s
        resource_detectors:
          environment: {}
EOF
```

> This installs Istio and configures the OpenTelemetry tracing provider. We are
> using the `http` exporter, and sending to the OTLP/HTTP endpoint in the Jaeger
> collector. We are also enabling the environment resource detector in
> `resource_detectors`.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, how about the following?

```suggestion
This installs Istio and configures the OpenTelemetry tracing provider to 
use the `http` exporter over OTLP/HTTP, with the Jaeger
collector as endpoint. This configuration also enables the environment resource detector in
`resource_detectors`.
```

```shell
kubectl label namespace default istio-injection=enabled
kubectl apply -f bookinfo.yaml
```

### Test it out

To test your setup, make some requests to one of the services, for example:

```shell
kubectl exec "$(k get pod -l app=ratings -o jsonpath='{.items[0].metadata.name}')" -c ratings -- curl -sS productpage:9080/productpage | grep -o "<title>.*</title>"
```

Then you can check it out on the Jaeger UI -- you should see some traces!

![Distributed trace viewing in Jaeger](jaeger.png)

From the spans produced by Envoy you can see (in order):

1. Outgoing (egress) call from the `ratings` service to the `productpage`
   service.
2. Incoming (ingress) call in the `productpage` service.
3. `host-name` resource attribute we applied using the
   `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`. This attribute was picked up by the environment
   resource detector and added to all spans Envoy created.

You can also see all the other downstream calls made, as all services have the
Envoy sidecar injected by Istio. You have full observability of the calls
between services, just by enabling the OTel tracer in Envoy!

## Next steps and closing

> With these new additions, users gain more flexibility in exporting their traces.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the new features described in this post, users gain more flexibility in exporting their traces.
```

---
title: 'Observability at the Edge: New OTel features in Envoy and Istio'
linkTitle: New OTel features in Envoy and Istio

> date: 2024-06-06

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2024-06-07
```
